Unified color palette set up (#622)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis: figures/README.md

|`gradient_col_palette.tsv`| <br>gradient_0:![f7f7f7](https://placehold.it/150x40/f7f7f7/000000?text=f7f7f7) <br>gradient_1:![f7fcf5](https://placehold.it/150x40/f7fcf5/000000?text=f7fcf5) <br>gradient_2:![e5f5e0](https://placehold.it/150x40/e5f5e0/000000?text=e5f5e0) <br>gradient_3:![c7e9c0](https://placehold.it/150x40/c7e9c0/000000?text=c7e9c0) <br>gradient_4:![a1d99b](https://placehold.it/150x40/a1d99b/FFFFFF?text=a1d99b) <br>gradient_5:![74c476](https://placehold.it/150x40/74c476/FFFFFF?text=74c476) <br>gradient_6:![41ab5d](https://placehold.it/150x40/41ab5d/FFFFFF?text=41ab5d) <br>gradient_7:![238b45](https://placehold.it/150x40/238b45/FFFFFF?text=238b45) <br>gradient_8:![006d2c](https://placehold.it/150x40/006d2c/FFFFFF?text=006d2c) <br>gradient_9:![00441b](https://placehold.it/150x40/00441b/FFFFFF?text=00441b) <br>na_color:![f1f1f1](https://placehold.it/150x40/f1f1f1/000000?text=f1f1f1)|10 hex_codes where gradient_0 is for an absolute `0` but may need to be removed from the palette depending on the application|For numeric data being plotted e.g. tumor mutation burden|

> |`divergent_col_palette.tsv`|<br>divergent_low_5:![67001f](https://placehold.it/150x40/67001f/FFFFFF?text=67001f) <br>divergent_low_4:![b2182b](https://placehold.it/150x40/b2182b/FFFFFF?text=b2182b) <br>divergent_low_3:![d6604d](https://placehold.it/150x40/d6604d/FFFFFF?text=d6604d) <br>divergent_low_2:![f4a582](https://placehold.it/150x40/f4a582/FFFFFF?text=f4a582) <br>divergent_low_1:![fddbc7](https://placehold.it/150x40/fddbc7/000000?text=fddbc7) <br>divergent_neutral:![f7f7f7](https://placehold.it/150x40/f7f7f7/000000?text=f7f7f7) <br>divergent_high_1:![d1e5f0](https://placehold.it/150x40/d1e5f0/000000?text=d1e5f0) <br>divergent_high_2:![92c5de](https://placehold.it/150x40/92c5de/FFFFFF?text=92c5de) <br>divergent_high_3:![4393c3](https://placehold.it/150x40/4393c3/FFFFFF?text=4393c3) <br>divergent_high_4:![2166ac](https://placehold.it/150x40/2166ac/FFFFFF?text=2166ac) <br>divergent_high_5:![053061](https://placehold.it/150x40/053061/FFFFFF?text=053061) <br>na_color:![f1f1f1](https://placehold.it/150x40/f1f1f1/000000?text=f1f1f1)|12 hex codes where the numbers in the name indicate distance from `divergent_neutral`.|For data has that is bidirectional e.g. Amplification/Deletion values like `seg.mean`|

Reviewer: I think these should be flipped, as folks tend to expect to see cool colors as lower or negative values and hot colors as higher or positive values. Take GISTIC plots for an example.

##### Amplification q-plot

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/19534205/76688663-42cfb680-6605-11ea-9bda-c10ca5ef4756.png)

##### Deletion q-plot

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/19534205/76688672-60048500-6605-11ea-993e-2f8238870ced.png)

Author: Okay. Will flip them.

|`binary_col_palette.tsv` |<br>binary_1:![2166ac](https://placehold.it/150x40/2166ac/FFFFFF?text=2166ac) <br>binary_2:![b2182b](https://placehold.it/150x40/b2182b/FFFFFF?text=b2182b) <br>na_color:![f1f1f1](https://placehold.it/150x40/f1f1f1/000000?text=f1f1f1)|A vector of two hex codes|For binary variables e.g. presence/absence or Amp/Del as statuses|

## Color coding examples in R

### Example color coding by `short_histology`.

Step 1) Read in color palette and format as a named list
```
histology_col_palette <- readr::read_tsv(
  file.path("figures", "palettes", "histology_color_palette.tsv")
  ) %>%
  # We'll use deframe so we can use it as a recoding list
  tibble::deframe()
```

> Step 2) For any data.frame with a `short_histology` column, recode NAs as "none".

Author: I'm not super happy with this the way I have this dealing with NAs, open to suggestions.

## Color Palette Usage

This project has a set of unified color palettes.
There are 6 sets of hex color keys to be used for all final figures, stored as 6 TSV files in the `figures/palettes` folder.
`hex_codes` contains the colors to be passed to your plotting code and `color_names` contains short descriptors of each color (e.g. `gradient_1`, or `divergent_neutral`).
Each palette contains an `na_color` that is the same color in all palettes. 
This color should be used for all `NA` values.
`na_color` is always the last value in the  palette.

> If `na_color` is not needed or is be supplied separately to a plotting function, you can use a `dplyr::filter(hex_code != "na_color")` to remove `na_color`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `na_color` is not needed or is supplied separately to a plotting function, you can use a `dplyr::filter(hex_code != "na_color")` to remove `na_color`.
```
This might be (probably is) my fault.

| Figure | Individual script | Notes on requirements | Linked analysis modules | PBTA data files consumed |
|--------|--------|------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Figure 2 | [scripts/fig2-mutational-landscape.R`](./scripts/fig2-mutational-landscape.R) | ~128MB of RAM are needed due to the run_caller_consensus_analysis-pbta.sh handling of large MAF files|[`snv-callers`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/snv-callers) <br> [`mutational-signatures`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis/tree/master/analyses/mutational-signatures) |  `pbta-snv-lancet.vep.maf.gz` <br> `pbta-snv-mutect2.vep.maf.gz` <br> `pbta-snv-strelka2.vep.maf.gz` <br> `pbta-snv-vardict.vep.maf.gz` <br> `tcga-snv-lancet.vep.maf.gz` <br> `tcga-snv-mutect2.vep.maf.gz` <br> `tcga-snv-strelka2.vep.maf.gz` |

## Color Palette Usage

This project has a set of unified color palettes.
There are six sets of hex color keys to be used for all final figures.
They are created by running `scripts/color-palettes.R` which creates 6 TSV files

> in the `figures/palettes` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 6 sets of hex color keys to be used for all final figures, stored as 6 TSV files
in the `figures/palettes` folder.
```
The part about the scripts is an aside that is not about _usage_ per se. I would instead put information about making alterations to the palettes in its own section that also tells you how to run the script. It can still be under `## Color Palette Usage`

Each palette TSV file has two columns of data: `hex_codes` and `color_names`.
`hex_codes` contains the colors to be passed to your plotting code and `color_names` contains short descriptors of each color (e.g. `gradient_1`, or `divergent_neutral`).
Each palette contains an `na_color` that is the same color in all palettes it

> is always the last value in the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each palette contains an `na_color` that is the same color in all palettes. 
This color should be used for all `NA` values.
`na_color` is always the last value in the  palette.
```

So depending on the circumstance, if `na_color` is not needed or will be supplied
to a plot's argument in a different way, you can use a `dplyr::filter(hex_code != "na_color")`

> to remove the `na_color`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `na_color` is not needed or is be supplied separately to a plotting function, you can use a `dplyr::filter(hex_code != "na_color")` to remove `na_color`.
```

Biospecimens without a `short_histology` designation are assigned the `NA` color

> for this project.

Reviewer: Some of these appear to be wrapped instead of one sentence per line.

Author: Habit. Whoops.

> for this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Biospecimens without a `short_histology` designation are assigned the `na_color`
```
Add the file name, explicitly mention that they are coded as `none` here.

## Color coding examples in R

#### Example 1) Color coding by `short_histology`.

**Step 1)** Read in color palette and format as a named list
```
histology_col_palette <- readr::read_tsv(
  file.path("figures", "palettes", "histology_color_palette.tsv")
  ) %>%
  # We'll use deframe so we can use it as a recoding list
  tibble::deframe()
```

**Step 2)** For any data.frame with a `short_histology` column, recode NAs as "none".
```
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path("data", "pbta-histologies.tsv") %>%
  # Easier to deal with NA short histologies if they are labeled something different
  dplyr::mutate(short_histology = as.character(tidyr::replace_na(short_histology, "none")))
```

**Step 3)** Use dplyr::recode on `short_histology` column to make a new color column.
```
metadata <- metadata %>%
  # Tack on the sample color using the short_histology column and a recode
  dplyr::mutate(sample_color = dplyr::recode(short_histology,
                                             !!!histology_col_palette))
```

**Step 4)** Make your plot and use the `sample_color` column.  

> Using the `ggplot2::scale_fill_identity()` or `ggplot2::scale_color_identity()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Using the `ggplot2::scale_fill_identity()` or `ggplot2::scale_color_identity()`
```

> allows you to supply an exact `hex_code` column to `ggplot2` with a `fill` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows you to supply the `hex_code` column from a color palette to `ggplot2` with a `fill` or
```
Do I retain your meaning?

`color` argument respectively.
For base R plots, you should be able to supply the `sample_color` column as your
`col` argument.
```
metadata %>%
  dplyr::group_by(short_histology, sample_color) %>%
  dplyr::summarize(count = dplyr::n()) %>%
  ggplot2::ggplot(ggplot2::aes(x = short_histology, y = count, fill = sample_color)) +
  ggplot2::geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  ggplot2::scale_fill_identity()
```

#### Example 2) Color coding by numeric data

**Step 1)** Import the palette.

> You may want to remove the `na_color` at the end of the list depending on what

Reviewer: What's an example of when to remove it? Not sure what "what your data look like" means here.

your data look like.
```
gradient_col_palette <- readr::read_tsv(
  file.path(figures_dir, "palettes", "gradient_color_palette.tsv")
  )
```

If we need the `NA` color separated, like for use with `ComplexHeatmap` which has
a separate argument for the color for `NA` values.

```
na_color <- gradient_col_palette %>%
  dplyr::filter(color_names != "na_color")

gradient_col_palette <- gradient_col_palette %>%
  dplyr::filter(color_names != "na_color")
```

**Step 2)** Make a color function.  

> The numbers supplied here will be highly dependent on what your data's distribution looks like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The numbers supplied here will be highly dependent on the distribution of the data you are plotting.
```

Reviewer: Supplied here or generated by `seq`? Do you mean for folks to change the `from` or `to` or are you talking about what ends up stored in `gradient_col_val`?

Author: Yes. My point is `seq` gives you a regular interval based on this example, but perhaps a regular interval for color coding your data isn't going to be what you want. e.g. if your data is on an exponential scale, a regular interval -based palette might not represent your data well on the plot.

> The numbers supplied here will be highly dependent on what your data's distribution looks like.

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, we are building a `colorRamp2` key based on a regular interval 
between the minimum and maximum of our variable `df$variable` by using `seq`. 
However, depending on your data's distribution a regular interval based palette 
might not represent your data well on the plot. 
You can provide any numeric vector to color code a palette using 
`circlize::colorRamp2` as long as that numeric vector is the same length as the 
palette itself.
```
Is this more clear?

  ggplot2::geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  ggplot2::scale_fill_identity()
```

#### Example 2) Color coding by numeric data

**Step 1)** Import the palette.

You may want to remove the `na_color` at the end of the list depending on what
your data look like.
```
gradient_col_palette <- readr::read_tsv(
  file.path(figures_dir, "palettes", "gradient_color_palette.tsv")
  )
```

If we need the `NA` color separated, like for use with `ComplexHeatmap` which has
a separate argument for the color for `NA` values.

```
na_color <- gradient_col_palette %>%
  dplyr::filter(color_names != "na_color")

gradient_col_palette <- gradient_col_palette %>%
  dplyr::filter(color_names != "na_color")
```

**Step 2)** Make a color function.  

In this example, we are building a `colorRamp2` function based on a regular interval between the minimum and maximum of our variable `df$variable` by using `seq`. 
However, depending on your data's distribution a regular interval based palette might not represent your data well on the plot. 
You can provide any numeric vector to color code a palette using `circlize::colorRamp2` as long as that numeric vector is the same length as the 

> palette itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can provide any numeric vector to color code a palette using `circlize::colorRamp2` as long as that numeric vector is the same length as the palette itself.
```

```
gradient_col_val <- seq(from = min(df$variable), to = max(df$variable),
                        length.out = length(gradient_col_palette))

col_fun <- circlize::colorRamp2(gradient_col_val,
                                gradient_col_palette)
```
**Step 3)** Apply to numeric data, or supply to your plotting code.  

This step depends on how your main plotting function would like the data supplied.
For example, `ComplexHeatmap` wants a function to be supplied to their `col` argument.
```
# Apply to variable directly and make a new column
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::mutate(color_key = col_fun(variable))

## OR ##

# Some plotting packages want a color function
ComplexHeatmap::heatmap(df,
  col = col_fun, 
  na_col = na_color
  )
```

### Updating color palettes

The color palette TSV files are created by running `scripts/color_palettes.R`, which 

> can be called by `Rscript scripts/color_palettes.R`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The color palette TSV files are created by running `scripts/color_palettes.R`, which can be called by `Rscript scripts/color_palettes.R`. 
```
